Moses A. Boudourides
===

Managed an FP6 grant. University staff didn't help at all. He had to sign off overhead expenses for staff he'd no idea what they were doing. No money left to pay for the actual research.

Hasn't taken part in a FP7 or H2020 project. Travels to conferences on his own salary.

Contact after Jan 17

Blandine Bril
===

Before ANR, FP, money was ditributed regularly to labs.
No need for paperwork. One could receive money and show nothing for it without any problem.

Nikos Smirnayos
===

Itv on Dec 14, 2016

Not H2020, but ANR. Absurd system, tried not to engage with it. Need to make consortiums brings nothing, just additional hassle. Consortia are never made sensibly. At Tarbes, 2 suicides recently, out of 200 staff.
Accepted to talk on record.

// Off the record
Athina Karatzogiannis
===
Uni Leicester, contact from Nikos. Itv on Dec 20 2016.

Overall, the experience was negative but there are some good things about it.

Participated in MIG@NET from 2010 to 2013. The main investigator was PANTEION Univ.

In Greece, there has been very few new openings in the last years, especially since the crisis hit in 2009. Talented people with a degree from prestigious universities such as LSE go back to Greece but get no jobs. Academia is very politicized. For these young people, for the precariat, the only option is to write bids for EU projects to get money and work.

Some of the problems of European projects are cultural interactions. In this project, PANTEION insisted that the review of the literature be made on the basis of nationality or language (i.e the Germans do the literature review of everything in German). In the context of the project, it didn't make sense. The coordinator said that it was to avoid the hegemony of English-language papers. No one would say anything. The young researchers would not dare say anything lest it hampers their job prospects. The professional culture in Greece is very hierarchical, people do not discuss. *Others just sit there because they knew they would do anything they wanted*.

PANTEION tried to kick me out of the project because of "cultural differences". In the end, I sent a research fellow to work for 20 months with the consortium. *Some people in the consortium did not understand what they were doing*.

A partner - Belgian - was kicked out in the course of the project (note NKB: couldn't find which one).

At the end of the project, when I came back to it, there was a change of atmosphere. Now I was welcome. Even though the Greeks were still late. I had to rewrite some of the deliverables.

The meetings could have been about research, but were mostly about organization.

People were not collaborating to have harmonized data. There was no symmetry in the case studies. We had 20 case studies but no symmetry. The problem was that we were not all at the same cultural and political point.

There are cultural differences on how people manage the money, too. In Spain, researchers would set up companies on the side and make extra money with European projects. In the UK, it makes no difference because the money does not go to our personal account. These differences explain how people interact in a collaboration.

There are problems with academic culture as well. People from different disciplins don't work in the same language. They don't have the same terms for the same concepts. And practicians do not even know what academics are talking about. There is also the issue of where to publish, in which journal? Different disciplines want to publish in different journals.

Positive aspects: The exchanges of views between disciplins and countries let you grow as a person and as an academic. You learn a lot about people during the meetings. You have new ideas because of the new interactions. The value lies in the moments that are not in the research. We even organized an event (without EU funds) with people from the consortium, later.



Eugenia Siapera
===

Uni Dublin, before Uni Aristotles. Itv on Dec 16, 2016

Submitted between 5 and 10 FP7 and Horizon2020 proposals. None was successful.

The consortia that apply to the the grants are formed through direct or indirect personal contacts. Often, she was chosen because she was Greek and consortia needed a Greek component. Such requirements were very strong in the COSP programme and FP7. Even if the requirement is lifted, consortia tend to form along the same lines (a Southern European for every Northern European), by habit. It is "ingrained" in people's mind.

15 years ago, when she started, it was a different environment. In the early 2000's, with FP5, it became more profesional. The consortia became bigger. The EC said it needed to "structure the knowledge area". Before, projects with less than 200kE could be made, which is not possible anymore. Universities need to have clerical positions and administrative support for grants that are over €1m.

In Ireland, academics can ask for financial support to Enterprise Ireland, a governement body that lends them money to hire grant writers, such as Pintail.eu. Calls are written in a "double-language", which has to be interpreted by professionals. "When I started, I felt I could understand the calls", she said. It is not the case anymore. Even for the Erasmus programme (not run by DG RTD), one of the simplest ones, she needs expert advice.

Pintail does not do project management, which universities do themselves. Universities use project management as a resource center, do not consider it overhead. As a professor, she is asked to produce income for the university.

Does it have an impact on research? Yes. She is not driven by her research interests, but by the priorities set by the EC. An example of a project that she cannot get funded is a comparison of the startup ecosystem between Berlin and Dublin.

Another source of funding is the Irish Research Council, but it nails the H2020 agenda. When receiving a grant from the IRC, one of the deliverables is always to apply to a H2020 grant. IRC in effect finances research far removed from the interest of the Irish taxpayers but directed by the bureaucrats in Brussels.

//off-the-record
George Giannakopoulos <ggianna@scify.org>
===

Itv on Dec 19, 2016

Need to know PO at the EC to undesrtraand what they want really. Need to build trust with EC PO.

Need to find a consortium partner who's won already.

5% success rate.

Innovation projects can "succeed if you care". Mostly doesn't

Can work if you find the right partners.

OKKAM: example of a successful project

Projects ask for more money after a project (eg. ACRONY and ACRONY2)

NOMAD (# 288513), project where Scify was contractor, led to contracts (after visibvility). Also: other projects with consortium partners. NOMAD: consortium stayed together, no fighting.

Big names like IBM Google etc. bring name but put no effort. Some ppl at Google were not even allowed to use company computers when working on these projects.

Fraunhofer: not really good opinion. Had to work extra hours to cover up for their mistakes, and were treated badly by Fraunhofer.

Reviewers have little time but focus on what they know.

George Anadiotis
===

Itv on Jan 9, 2016

Made 12 applications, of which 5 as lead applicant. Some as part of Free Uni Amsterdam, others in a private company. None received funding.

Was once a reviewer for a project, says that while the grading is fair, political decisions are taken by the reviewing committee, on which one EC personnel sits, to filter sensitive projects. An example he gave of a project he did was on crypto currencies, which he beleives was turned down on political grounds.